So now, we will do a little exercise which will help you understand
a little bit better how CT scanners construct their images.
We'll implement an algorithm that's performing what's called a
back projection of a signal,
which is measured by a CT scanner.
We'll be writing a little bit of code, but before that,
I would like to walk you through some of the basics of a Jupyter notebook.
So let's take a look at the Jupyter.
In this exercise, I will be walking with you through this Jupyter notebook.
The Jupyter notebook is also available in the code repository.
It contains some of the places where you're invited to fill in
the code so you will be able to run through it yourself.
But I would like to get some important points across.
So let's take a look at it.
First let's get into the concept called sinograms.
Every time a detector is taking an image shot,
our detector in a CT machine is computing
the amount of photons that are passing through the body.
Because we do not have access to an actual CT machine,
let's simulate that and let's pretend like
we have an array of data which has been sampled from a CT machine.
So that's the first part that we're going to do.
We will do that by using a phantom.
Phantoms are commonly used in medical imaging.
As you can see on the screen here,
I pieced out a photograph for you which I took at a radiological show.
This is a picture of a phantom of a fetus.
So that's like a little model of a human that
is made out of materials which have the same density as real physical materials.
So phantoms are pretty common in either scenarios where people calibrate CT,
MR scanners or other types of radiological devices
or develop some digital image processing algorithms
like the one that we are going to do now.
So don't mind this code for now.
We will get into the codes later.
What is happening here,
we are using the Python PIL library and we use Pillow to open a bitmap file.
We convert this to a grayscale.
So we visualize it and here we have our phantom.
So our phantom is a grayscale image which consists of different geometrical shapes.
So we have a rectangle here, an oval,
we have a full white circle and little gray circle inside it.
So let us do what combination of CT sources and detectors are doing.
Let us cast rays through this picture along the X-axis here,
and let us add up
all the values that the rays is hitting as they're passing through this image.
So we have a little bit of code here.
We just go through the image lines and add up all the values.
So let's visualize and see what we get here.
So we can see that we get this shape,
where you have some values here in the beginning.
This is corresponding to our oval shape.
If we scroll up, this is the oval that we're talking about.
Then we have this large signal that corresponds to our big circle,
and we have a dependent which corresponds to a cut out in the circle.
If we scroll up, this is the circle, this is the cut out.
We have a rectangular signal which corresponds to a rectangle. This is the rectangle.
This is very close to what a CT detector is seeing
once it receives a batch of photons from a single shot.
So what was happening then,
we've talked about how CT has this gantry and how the source rotates within
the gantry and the detectors are measuring the radiation coming from different angles.
Let's simulate that.
Let's use the Pillow library to rotate our image a little bit.
Let's rotate by 60 degrees.
Our image is rotated.
Let's run through the same process.
Let's plot it. So you can see the graph here has changed.
So we still see our oval,
we see our big circle.
So our rectangle right now stands at an angle.
So you have the sharp peak here where we're hitting the diagonal of this rectangle.
An interesting thing here,
which I would like you to think about is,
see this little kind of saw-tooth pattern on the circle part and on the rectangle part.
Why do you think that is?
Try to think about it.
Look at the image, and think why this could happen.
It is interesting because such kind of artifacts are happening in
the real CT scanners and there are algorithms employed to combat those.
So now let's compute what's called a sinogram.
We have made one projection from one angle of the gantry rotation,
we've done another projection from a different angle.
Now let's compute a set of projections.
So let's rotate our image by
three degrees and let's take a projection every three degrees.
A little bit more code building up on what we have already.
You'll be able to look through this code later.
Notice that I use NumPy here,
and NumPy helps speed things up and make it a little bit more concise.
So at this point,
we have computed an array of our projections.
Let us see what will happen if we stack all of those projections.
So remember, each projection you have points corresponding to
each x coordinates along the x-axis.
So let us stack those on top of each other,
and let's display those as an image. This is quite beautiful.
So this is what's called the sinogram.
So this is a visualization of all projections.
So if you remember how we looked at our first projection in the beginning.
So we had some early signal from the oval.
So this is the signal here.
We have some signal from the circle,
we have a darker spot from
the embedded circle and then we have a signal from the rectangle.
Then as we rotate our image,
this things start to shift because we rotate gradually,
you see this sinusoidal undulating patterns
on the image and that's why it's called a sinogram.
So this is the image that you would get from a CT scanner.
This is the digital sampling of the analog signal.
This is where the C part in a CT of the computer tomography kicks in.
So you get this sinogram from
a scanner and now you need to apply it in algorithm and turn
the sinogram into a two-dimensional image which a human can take a look at.
Essentially, we need to perform a reverse process.
We need to add up all those projections somehow and reconstruct the motion of the gantry.
That's why it's called a back projection.
So we're computing projections back.
So what will happen now,
we will take one projection of the sinogram.
So we start from the top.
What we will do, we will smear it across all the pixels of our 2D image.
So we know what should be the size of our 2D image.
So we have so many points on one projection,
and we have so many projections,
so we know the size of the output.
We construct this image in memory here and then we just take the first one and
we repeat it across all of the values of the image that we are trying to reconstruct.
Let's see what we get. Well, not surprising,
we get smear representation of one of those projections.
Well, as you might have guessed, what we do right now,
we rotate this image by three degrees because that was the degree
of rotation we were acquiring those projections and we will smear another projection.
We will keep doing that until we will have done all of them.
Let's see what we get if we do this computation.
Again, the computation is quite simple here.
So after we've gone through this process,
we have the spherical BP,
the back projection, which contains our reconstructed image.
So let's visualize it using Matplotlib.
You see, we made it.
So this looks like our original image.
You see it's a little bit blurry.
There is a bit of artifacting going on.
You see these blocking artifacts,
but this looks very similar to
an unfiltered image that you would get after the back projection process.
What happens in real CT scanners from this point,
we have a string of filtering algorithms that kick in.
They sharpen the image, they reduce the blurring,
and they produce this nice and beautiful and sharp CT image that you might see.
So we have seen how a process of CT back projection works.
How we get our two-dimensional images from a projection data,
from a sinogram that's coming off a CT scanner.
Hopefully, this has given you some intuition for why CT images look the way they are,
and why you can see some of the artifacts.
Like for example, you could see how if an image has a strong signal,
an intense signal that results in a bright white pixels.
How this value gets propagated to all the neighboring pixels.
This is actually what happens in real world.
So strong signals that coming off things like implants or calcifications,
they tend to produce those thriking artifacts that smear the cross pixels
around it and sometimes you need to account for that when you're doing your processing.
So at the end of this exercise,
I invite you to write your own bit of code.
There is an image in the directory with the Jupyter notebook.
This image contains a slice of a human head
CT and you're invited to compute to your own unfiltered
back projection from it in the same way we've just done in
this Jupyter notebook run through. Good luck.